[Music]
across the world
our wildlife is facing a multitude of
threats
from the largest species to the smallest
and the uk is no exception
an iconic species made famous from the
wind in the willow storybook as the
character ratty
the watervol is in serious trouble
once found across the uk it's estimated
that in recent years
the water bowl has disappeared from 90
of its previous range
this fast and sudden decline has made it
one of our rarest mammals here in the uk
but here in devon a group of ecologists
are aiming to reverse that decline
and bring the waterfall back from the
brink of extinction
[Music]
we've come to the derek gao consultancy
here in devon
to see exactly what the team are doing
to give the waterfall
a fighting chance and it's not long
after we've arrived that we're greeted
by some fluffy little faces
this is jenny tratt who is the animal
manager here on site
and we want to find out what they do
here at the consultancy
and just how important these little
mammals are
so tell us a little bit about the work
you do here with the water bowls
so we breed the water voles we'll go on
to different sites and we'll trap them
if they're trying to do construction
work and obviously the waterfalls aren't
allowed to be there anymore
and then we bring them back to site here
and we'll breed them and then we'll
release them onto sites
so they can be free how many voles do
you have in here at the moment
so we roughly have between 400 and 500
voles in here at the moment
and they're just being temporarily
housed whilst we're waiting for release
it's quite a lot of voles in one barn
where
they all come from we breed them here on
site we use
a breeding stock that we've had here for
years we keep using them
and then we also trap from different
sites and they're
used to be bred to go back to the
receptor habitats that they make for
them
water voles are vegetarian and in the
wild they have been found to eat
over 200 different plant species
and here the team try to give them all
of their dietary needs
we release all over the country really
some of these will be going
up as far as chester some will be going
to wales some will be going to london
it just depends where the release sites
are for this year the team have to
assess each waterfall on a daily basis
to ensure
they are putting on sufficient weight to
be released
waterfalls need to eat 80 of their body
weight each day
and over the years the breeding program
has been running the team have worked
out the exact diet for them
so you've got a waterfall in here yeah
so there's actually there's two
waterfalls in here
and we're just going to get them out and
weigh them and give them a general
health check really
holding the water vol gently by their
tail ensures that they stay still
and don't panic this means the team can
carry out all necessary health checks
causing
minimal stress to the animal so he is
now
180 grams and he was
170 so he's gained 10 grams which is
nice
and that's what we want yeah definitely
differently so in the
the bigger cages there can be up to six
voles in here
so these guys are out and really active
as you can see waiting to be fed
why do you keep them all together like
that so these are in sibling groups we'd
never mix them with a different family
because they're really territorial so
they they would just
try and kill each other basically so
yeah they stay in sibling groups
and then we just we basically bring them
in here as a bit of temporary housing
and then we sort them all out and get
them ready and then they go on release
so these guys will be released within
the next month
the watervol families are only kept in
these pens for a short time before they
are taken to a release site
it is incredibly important that they
have put on enough weight before they
head out into the wild
and the teamwork around the clock to
ensure they are in tip-top condition
and of course water bowls have undergone
a mammoth decline across the uk what are
the main
threats affecting them most of it is
habitat destruction really
people are obviously building a lot of
houses that's using a lot of the
land that these guys would be living in
and also we've got predators so
the american mink really didn't help
these guys from about the 1970s onwards
they can quite happily wipe out a
waterfall population
if you get a female mink in the ditch
system where they are
despite their relatively small size
water voles are an important species of
freshwater
systems as they create micro habitats
for other species
they create burrow systems in the sides
of river banks
this dries out the surrounding soil and
helps regulate nitrogen
a vital nutrient for plant growth
and what are the main signs if you think
you've got water voles living near you
what what signs can people look out for
you might hear everybody say as you walk
past the water you might hear the plop
as they jump in the water
if you really want to get in and park
the vegetation you might see burrows or
you might see feeding signs so they eat
shoots and grasses and things and it's
always at a 45 degree angle
and you'll find that in little piles or
you may find signs of droppings which
would be in piles as well
water voles excavate extensive burrow
networks in the side of river banks
and these burrows aren't only used by
the waterfall
but also by other species and are a
vital part of the ecosystem
and little do they know it but these
water bowls right here
are amongst some of the most important
creatures in the uk
and why is the conservation of
waterfalls so
important if we're not here breeding
them to release them
the whole population would go extinct
derek's played a massive part in that
and yes we need them here really so they
can feed other animals they're bottom of
the food chain
so yeah it's helping other animals as
well as themselves really
[Music]
not only is the water bowl a bit of an
iconic mammal here in the uk but now
it's a bit of a myth a species written
about in storybooks
all those years ago you now have to be
incredibly lucky to see one in the wild
and i really hope that thanks to groups
like this
landowners and the general public that
the waterfall does make a comeback
as wouldn't it be lovely to see these
little faces
in our waterways once more
[Music]
you